Football is a family of team sports that involve, to varying degrees, kicking a ball with the foot to score a goal. Unqualified, the word football is understood to refer to whichever form of football is the most popular in the regional context in which the word appears. Sports commonly called 'football' in certain places include: association football (known as soccer in some countries); gridiron football (specifically American football or Canadian football); Australian rules football; rugby football (either rugby league or rugby union); and Gaelic football. These different variations of football are known as football codes.
Various forms of football can be identified in history, often as popular peasant games. Contemporary codes of football can be traced back to the codification of these games at English public schools during the nineteenth century. The expanse of the British Empire allowed these rules of football to spread to areas of British influence outside of the directly controlled Empire. By the end of the nineteenth century, distinct regional codes were already developing: Gaelic football, for example, deliberately incorporated the rules of local traditional football games in order to maintain their heritage.[6] In 1888, The Football League was founded in England, becoming the first of many professional football competitions. During the twentieth century, several of the various kinds of football grew to become some of the most popular team sports in the world.
We know many kinds of games. The game of football is one of them. It was first played in the western countries. Now, it is played all over the world. The football has a rubber bladder inside a leather cover. It becomes a hard round thing when we pump air into it.
How this game is played-Football is played between two teams of players. There are eleven players in each team. They play in a measured field. The ground for this game is one hundred and ten meters long and seventy-five meters broad, the court is properly marked with lines. Each team has a goal-post at the back end of each side. Each team has a goal-keeper, four backs, two half-backs, one right out, one left out and two centre-forwards. The play begins at the centre of the field. Each party tries to pass the ball through the goal-post of the other party. The goal-keeper guards against the ball. So, the ball cannot pass his goal-post. If he fails to check the ball, his party is defeated.
The players have to observe the rules of this game. No player except the goal-keeper can touch the ball with his hands. Otherwise he will commit the wrong of handling the ball. Here the other party gets an advantage of charging a free ball. Throw ball, corner ball are such wrongs that give advantages to the opposite party.
The game of football is much useful to us. It is an outdoor game. Hence, weWe know many kinds of games. The game of football is one of them. It was first played in the western countries. Now, it is played all over the world. The football has a rubber bladder inside a leather cover. It becomes a hard round thing when we pump air into it. How this game is played-Football is played between two teams of players. There are eleven players in each team. They play in a measured field. The ground for this game is one hundred and ten meters long and seventy-five meters broad, the court is properly marked with lines. Each team has a goal-post at the back end of each side. Each team has a goal-keeper, four backs, two half-backs, one right out, one left out and two centre-forwards. The play begins at the centre of the field. Each party tries to pass the ball through the goal-post of the other party. The goal-keeper guards against the ball. So, the ball cannot pass his goal-post. If he fails to check the ball, his party is defeated.
The players have to observe the rules of this game. No player except the goal-keeper can touch the ball with his hands. Otherwise he will commit the wrong of handling the ball. Here the other party gets an advantage of charging a free ball. Throw ball, corner ball are such wrongs that give advantages to the opposite party.
The game of football is much useful to us. It is an outdoor game. Hence, we get all the benefits of physical exercise. Besides, we learn harmony, discipline and sportsmanship through the game of football.
The game of football is a popular game all over the world. It is popular in the cities and towns of India. But it is not widely played in our countryside. So, we should try to make it popular with our country-folk. get all the benefits of physical exercise. Besides, we learn harmony, discipline and sportsmanship through the game of football.
The game of football is a popular game all over the world. It is popular in the cities and towns of India. But it is not widely played in our countryside. So, we should try to make it popular with our country-folk.
