Swimming is a recommendable sport in practical aspects. First of all, it is necessary to learn how to swim in case of the emergency. There are many chances to go near the water because many people take holidays by the sea, lakes or river, especially in summer. The more chances to go near the water you get, the more possibilities to fall into the water there are. To survive from drowning, you should learn how to swim, which means that swimming is not only a sport but also the means that offers guarantee of people's survival. Second of all, swimming is an effective exercise to lose weight. It expends many calories without high impact on joints compared with other sports. It makes weight loss of every part of your body in balance, so you would get fit and slim. If you can control the amount of meal you eat, it is most effective on loss weight without doing harm. In addition, swimming can make you stay healthy. Because you should hold your breath repeatedly, and it is demanding aerobically, your lung and heart will get stronger and healthier. Swimming uses all the major muscle, so it increases muscle power and the level of physical activities, and it also helps to keep joints flexible, especially in the neck and shoulders. Finally, swimming opens the door to lots of activities such as scuba diving or surfing. Many other water sports demand swimming as a preliminary condition. Swimming is involved in most water sports directly or indirectly, so if you don't know how to swim, you must hesitate to enjoy them and take much longer time for you to learn them. These days many people have been interested in leisure sports including water sports. If you are good at swimming, you will learn them fast and easily, and can spend holidays enjoying other water sports. As I mentioned above, there are many practical benefits which promote the enjoyment and charm of swimming.
The most famous sports activity in the world is swimming. People like to watch a world famous swimming match. They can keep awake until midnight to watch such a match on their TV. They watch it not only for the sports activities, but also for entertainment. Moreover, these reasons make me choose swimming become my hobby. Nevertheless, three more things make me love swimming very much; as if some advantages that I get from this sport activity, swimming’s stroke that I cannot get in the other hobbies and swimming’s equipment that different.
 Swimming has many advantages that are good for human’s health. In addition, I experience of it, as if my body’s fat can burned. With swimming, I can burn 25% of my body’s fat. Besides that, with swimming I can free from asthma. I get asthma since I was in the first grade of elementary school. In addition, I practice swimming when I was in the second grade of elementary school. After 2 months I practice swimming, my doctor said that I free from asthma. It is because swimming helps to practice my lungs. Swimming also makes me relax. The last advantage that I get is my body become higher.
 Unlike the other hobbies that just have one stroke, swimming has four strokes. They are crawl stroke, chest stroke, back crawl stroke, and butterfly stroke. In addition, they make me not feel bored when I do this sport activity. The easiest stroke is chest stroke. In this stroke, I just need strong legs and strong hands to push and to row. Chest stroke is my favorite stroke. I think that the most difficult stroke is butterfly stroke. It needs good collaboration between arms and legs. In addition, I cannot do this stroke well because I have a serious injury in my left leg. Back crawl stroke has medium difficulty. It needs strong legs to push and to row. The last stroke is crawl stroke. It needs a good collaboration between arms, legs, and breath.
 Everyone in the world know that all of the hobbies need some equipment. The equipment facilitates the player to do the hobby. Swimming also needs some equipment to facilitate the player. Moreover, swimming’s equipment are different from the others hobby. The other hobbies just need simple equipment, like golf. It just needs two equipment. They are golf ball and a long stick. However, swimming is different. It needs five equipment. Without this equipment, this activity cannot do. The first equipment is swimming suit. Maybe, all of people think that swimming suit is not important equipment. I also think like that. However, finally I know that swimming suit is very important. Swimming suit has a special material. It has light material. This material facilitates us to swim well. That is why we must use swimming suit when we swimming. Then, the second equipment is pull boy. At the first time, I never use pull boy. However, after I get some accident, my swimming’s teacher said to me that I must use this. It helps when I push in the water. The next equipment is shower cap. It makes my hair still dry. The fourth equipment is life buoy. It is very useful for me. It makes me not sink. The last equipment is hand paddles. It helps me when I row in the water.
So, swimming is the right hobby for me. Because, I like useful sport. From swimming, I can get many advantages that good for my health. Beside that, I can learn about swimming stroke that make me swim well. And, I can swimming safely with the right swim’s equipment.

